---

#Performance or punctuation?#

*Tazuko van Berkel, Michael Kelley, Thom van Leuveren*

---
##Book 19, line 63: peculiar use of punctuation
[link to an image][Iliad19line63]

*MICHAEL*
* lavish punctuation after each word.
* has the punctuator gone mad here.

*THOM*
Some context: Achilles confronts Agamemnon
* paraphrase until 59
* exact translation of line 63: "For Hector and the Trojans *this* is better"

---
##The fifth main scholion
[link to an image][MainScholion5]
*MICHAEL*
* transcription: ἕκτορι μὲν καὶ Τρωσὶ τὸ, ἀντωνυμία μὲν ὁμολογουμένως τὸ τό μόριον οὐ μὴν διασταλτέον καταυτὸ ὡς ἔδοξε τισίν
* translation: "to Hector and the Trojans this", the particle "τό" is a pronoun (ἀντωνυμία) by consensus. However, one should not pause after each as some have thought.
* to summarize: the word "τό" (generally an article) is used here as a demonstrative pronoun. Everybody agrees on that. However (μήν) we should not infer from this that we need to pause after each and every word, as some seem to have thought.
* note: μήν implies a relation between the first clause (about "τό" being a pronoun) and the second clause that adresses issues of performance or punctuation.

---
##Research Questions

[link to an image][MainScholion5]

*MICHAEL*
2 questions that emerge from this scholion:

1. What is the relation between the two sentences? (i.e. between article-as-pronoun and the διασταλτέον issue)
Might there be an issue of accentuation? Some standardworks on accentuation (Laum) seems to think that there might be evidence for peculiar accentuation issues for articles-used-as-pronouns. There is no evidence for this in the early grammarians that make up the bulk of our scholiastic material.
2. What were τινες thinking? Why *would* you punctuate after each and every word?
Erbse says: we have no idea what they were thinking.

---
##A close parallel

[link to an image][Scholion1line396a]
[link to an image][Scholion1line396b]

*THOM*

* Iliad book 1 line 396: πολλάκι γάρ σεο πατρὸς ἐνὶ μεγάροισιν ἄκουσα
* translation: "For often I have heard you in my father's palace"
* scholion on this line: βραχὺ δὲ διασταλτέον μετὰ τὴν ἀντωνυμίαν· τὸ γὰρ ἑξῆς ἐστι, πολλάκι γάρ σου ἤκουσα.
* translation: "One need to pause (same word διασταλτέον!) briefly after the pronoun (same word ἀντωνυμίαν!); for the construction (τὸ γὰρ ἑξῆς) runs as follows (here follows a prose rendition of the same line, but omitting the adverbial frase πατρὸς ἐνὶ μεγάροισιν): "for often have I heard you"
* the point: σεο and πατρὸς are NOT to be taken together, even though they agree in case, number and gender. σεο is a complement of the verb ἀκούω (ἀκούω takes the genetive: "I have heard you"), but πατρὸς is an attribute that goes with ἐνὶ μεγάροισιν ("my father's palace").
* βραχὺ δὲ διασταλτεόν is a *PERFORMANCE DIRECTION* that gives the reader (remember that people read out loud!) directions how to *parse* the sentence

---
##Back to our scholion

[link to an image][MainScholion5]

*THOM*

* scholion on 19.63: similarly you need to parse the line τό κέρδιον *NOT* as one wordgroup but as subject and predicate. This is the **first** sentence of the scholion.
* The performer is offered help in the *main text*: the periods before and after τό help to single τό out as the subject of the sentence and as a pronoun. 
* *However*, and this is the **second** sentence of the scholion, one should *NOT* mistake the periods in the main text for *punctuation marks*; they are merely there to help you in the performance of the line.
* Therefore, the τινες may not necessarily be grammarians (as Erbse assumes when he talks about "illi grammatici"), but may be casual readers

---
##Implications and further directions

*MICHAEL*

* further insight into the use of periods in the Venetus A-text
* potential insight into how the Iliad-text was used in Alexandrian times: no silent reading, but "performance"
* further directions: a systematic inquiry into how periods are used, how grammatical terms such as διαστέλλω are used.

---
links
[Iliad19line63]: http://www.homermultitext.org/iipsrv?OBJ=IIP,1.0&FIF=/project/homer/pyramidal/VenA/VA252VN-0754.tif&RGN=0.482,0.4545,0.311,0.027&WID=9000&CVT=JPEG

[MainScholion5]:http://www.homermultitext.org/iipsrv?OBJ=IIP,1.0&FIF=/project/homer/pyramidal/VenA/VA252VN-0754.tif&RGN=0.233,0.5402,0.209,0.0601&WID=9000&CVT=JPEG

[Scholion1line396a]: http://www.homermultitext.org/iipsrv?OBJ=IIP,1.0&FIF=/project/homer/pyramidal/VenA/VA019VN-0521.tif&RGN=0.632,0.728,0.241,0.0158&WID=9000&CVT=JPEG

[Scholion1line396b]: http://www.homermultitext.org/iipsrv?OBJ=IIP,1.0&FIF=/project/homer/pyramidal/VenA/VA019VN-0521.tif&RGN=0.254,0.7423,0.241,0.0158&WID=9000&CVT=JPEG
